How did Rome lose its republic? And what
does it forewarn us about our own world
today?
This is an important question to
consider, especially when the answers
often start sounding a little too
familiar to what we hear in the news
cycle today.
Unfortunately, much of this discussion
gets missed as most people looking for
parallels seem to flock to the far more
common question of why did the Roman
Empire fall?
And justifiably so, it's a much more
dramatic topic that gets to play with
themes of civilizational collapse and
dark ages.
But the appeal of the latter question
often gets outsized attention.
Indeed, just about every commentator
throughout history has used the fall of
Rome as a way to reflect upon the fall
of some great power in their own day and
age.
Usually, this involves latching onto
notions of decadence, lead poisoning,
crazy emperors, barbarian invasions, and
so on.
These takes are universally quite bad
and ignore a lot of nuance when it comes
to understanding why the Roman Empire
actually fell and even if fall is an apt
description.
The same is true when it comes to the
more relevant question of why the Roman
Republic fell.
It's a complicated issue where simple
takes and direct comparisons are
ill-advised.
But with proper nuance, a closer look
provides far better reflections upon the
timeless societal trends of class
struggle, ineffective governance,
populism, and ratcheting
authoritarianism.
This is the story of how Rome lost its
republic.
So, as you can see, I absolutely love
exploring the history of civilizations
and seeing what leads to their rise and
fall. And it often leaves you wondering
how might things have turned out
differently. Now, thankfully, you can
use the past as a playground with
today's sponsor, Heroes of History.
It's a city-building and hero collection
game featuring real and mythological
characters from across the ages.
Gameplay sees you evolve your civ
through combat, research, and strategy
while fielding character lineups to take
on rivals across both competitive and
co-op settings. For me, the strength of
Heroes of History is being able to
explore the different characters and
factions that we've actually covered in
our Units of History series.
For instance, you'll find the Kandake of
Nubia who uses her bow skills to snipe
foes, Cyrus the Great who uses strategic
mastery to damage wide areas of the
battlefield, and the Oracle of Delphi
who uses prophetic visions to lower
enemy defense.
There's more than 120 characters to
choose from right now and it just keeps
on building. For instance, starting
March 11th to April 28th, the Ancient
Egypt event brings Nefertiti and
Tutankhamun to the mix as you face off
against Anubis.
Join the Ancient Egypt event to face
Anubis yourself by logging into the game
and get a limited hero, Tutankhamun.
Note that the hero won't be available
after the event is over, ever. So, get
started today and load up on the
resources you'll need by clicking the
link in the description below, scanning
the QR code above, and using my code
Invicta to get the Anubis Awakening
Starter Pack for 10 antimatter, 2,000
XP, 20,000 food, and five divine keys.
Enjoy.
And thanks again to Heroes of History.
Before we begin with the fall of the
Republic, a couple disclaimers are
needed.
For starters, the term republic is quite
broad, encompassing many forms of
government. And a lot of the traits
people tend to associate with the
republic today have very little in
common with Rome's own res publica,
which is the general term they used to
describe the public affair of government
regardless of what modern labels we
might slap onto it.
Looking closer, we see that Rome's
republic was not particularly democratic
in the first place.
Basically, how it worked is you had the
citizenry broken out into the rich
patricians and the common plebians.
These groups then came together to vote
in various assemblies whose structure
favored the wealthy.
The assemblies then worked to elect the
magistrates or pass the laws which
governed Rome.
From the start, the system highly
favored the aristocratic ruling class
>> [music]
>> with power only slowly being clawed back
by the plebians over the course of a
centuries-long struggle known as the
conflict of the orders.
But even with such concessions, the
elites could still effectively bypass
the voting system by way of an unelected
Senate which presided over the
government, advising magistrates, and
proposing what laws could be put up to
vote in the first place.
I should also note that the system was
far more nuanced than I've been able to
show here and was constantly being
evolved over the years.
But for our purposes today, this
schematic hopefully gives you a general
idea of how the Roman government worked.
Among this ruling class, we should note
that there were no political parties.
Even between the so-called optimates and
populares of the late Republic, their
differences had more to do with whether
they sought to elevate themselves by
tapping into traditional oligarchic
power or emerging popular sentiments.
Beyond this, there are all kinds of
traps one can fall into when attempting
to draw comparisons.
The role of dictators is a common
example.
While today the term is laden with poor
connotations, at the time dictators were
short-term emergency levers that could
be pulled to centralize authority in the
face of an emergency.
While this misunderstanding has been
somewhat rehabilitated in pop culture,
there are still underlying nuances at
play.
For instance, you might expect that as
the Roman Republic accelerated its
decline, the number of people rushing to
pull the dictator lever in a bid to
seize control would likely increase.
After all, Julius Caesar who crossed the
Rubicon with an army went on to anoint
himself dictator for life.
Yet if you track the number of dictators
that appear across the Republic's
history, it's the opposite with the
early years being dominated by these men
of extraordinary power even at a time
when we would otherwise view the system
as being relatively healthy.
Hopefully, this all helps demonstrate
why hot takes on this topic require a
heaping of salt and why direct
comparisons should be viewed with a lot
of skepticism.
That being said, if we apply the concept
of history doesn't repeat, it rhymes,
then there's a lot of relevant themes to
be discussed with the fall of the Roman
Republic. Much more so than with the
fall of the Roman Empire.
Thus, it will be our goal today to
explore these topics.
Not to draw parallels ourselves, but to
lay out the nuances of history that
often get lost in the soundbites of pop
history.
To do so, we'll be presenting two
long-form discussions. The first,
looking at the major forces weakening
the pillars of the Republic. The second,
tracing the dominoes of its collapse.
That being said, I know long-form videos
aren't for everyone and it's worth
front-loading at least the highlights.
So, let's skim through these now before
diving in.
To start off, we're looking at a long
timeline here.
Zooming in on just the Republican
period, there's about 500 years of
history. A ton happened in this era.
At a high level though, it's important
to understand that the size of the Roman
Republic and the nature of its
government greatly evolved across this
spectrum of time.
Just by considering this fact alone, it
seems quite obvious that something was
going to break along the way.
Exactly which crack you point to as the
start of the fall is open to
interpretation and really depends on
what story threads you want to follow.
For our own discussion, we choose to
start at the end of the Second Punic War
when Rome was the undisputed master of
the Western Mediterranean.
From here, we trace the following beats.
The forever wars that fueled Rome's
expansion across the rest of the
Mediterranean.
The social and economic cost this had on
the average militia troops who served
increasingly long tours away from home.
The disproportionate benefits reaped by
the upper classes during these years of
growth.
The inability of the Republican
government to deal with the negative
effects of these aforementioned issues,
largely as a result of having been
founded as but a small city management
system with only bandaids and the
precedents of mos maiorum, the way of
the ancestors, to Frankenstein together
an apparatus which was expected to
somehow manage the equivalent of dozens
of modern countries.
The ensuing inability of the government
to solve problems leading to a rise in
populism as the masses sought any relief
from their suffering.
The co-opting of this movement by
leaders like the Gracchi brothers who
rode the populist wave to advance their
own careers.
The reactionary moves by the
establishment to resist change leading
to the populists to exploit legal
loopholes and shatter norms to get their
way.
An ensuing cycle of tit-for-tat
escalations by both sides that
increasingly resulted in a violent
might-makes-right approach to governing.
All the while, the average person was
seeing almost no improvements to their
situation and was growing increasingly
disillusioned with the entire corrupt
system.
In part two of this discussion, we see
how it all came crashing down as
political bickering escalated to
outright civil war starting with the
bloodshed of the Social War when Italian
allies rose up for their own rights.
Followed by a series of strongmen who
used their armies to claim the capital
and purge their rivals.
Notably, we see several attempts to
return the system to how it once was,
but this utterly failing in the face of
the now obvious fact that the next
person could simply topple the whole
thing with violence.
Yet in this era, some stability was
returned when several prominent figures
simultaneously made a bid for control
and entered into a power-sharing
agreement to rule the Republic as a
coalition.
Even if these men declared a truce with
one another though, we should note that
the same did not apply to their
collective rivals leading to continued
purges.
However, even these triumvirs ultimately
proved short-lived when one leg of the
three-man stool died or was otherwise
sidelined leading to the remaining
strongmen duking out in a civil war.
This happened twice back-to-back within
about a generation.
The end result was that by 31 BC, when
Octavian emerged victorious from his
battle with Mark Antony at Actium, no
one in the last few generations had the
faintest memory of a functioning
government and was absolutely exhausted
by the nonstop violence that had started
all the way back with the murder of the
Gracchi brothers a century earlier.
The cycle might have continued had
Octavian, now Augustus, not brought back
stability, ruled competently, and
allowed for successful transfer of power
to his appointed heir.
Thus did Republic officially transition
to Empire.
As it did so, the institutions of the
Republic were maintained though in name
only with all power behind the scenes
being redirected to a central authority
and his self-appointed minions.
But with all this preview out of the
way, let's now dive into the fascinating
details of the real history.
So here is going to be our board for
today's discussion. We'll be covering
the fall of Rome's Republic in two
parts. This is mostly going to be
setting things up. And to do so, for
those unfamiliar with our kind of method
here, what we like to do is it's a long
conversation with Chris, who I'll
introduce shortly.
But essentially, that conversation is
discussion-style, but to help guide it,
we have this pre-prepared board that is
rich with visuals and notes to help you
get more out of the conversation and
help tether it. But feel free to listen
to this in podcast style if you like.
But for visual watchers, there is stuff
that will add to the conversation. That
being said, the discussion today is
going to be focusing on a couple key
things. We'll have those in the
timestamps if you want to jump ahead.
But the first part is the intro, just
laying out the scope of what we want to
cover. Then we'll do a historical speed
run to ground us into where we're at.
And then we've broken out the fall of
Rome's Republic into major pillars
of focus. So yeah, that is what we're
going to be covering today. And without
further ado, I'll introduce Chris, or
actually let him introduce himself.
Hey guys. If you've heard any of these
before, you likely know me. If not,
great. I My name's Chris. I'm a Roman
historian. I've been working with
Invicta for about 7 years now.
I generally focus on economic and social
history, but what that translates into
is just I like to tell stories about
people and who they really were as
opposed to, you know, just soldiers and
stuff like that.
Excellent. That is the intro. But let's
get started with where on earth do we
start with this whole discussion? So
Chris,
point us ahead.
All right. So when I was making this
board, I had to figure out where we were
going to start with this. And if you ask
10 different historians, they'll give
you 10 different answers on where to
start talking about the fall of the
Roman Republic. I chose the year 201 BC.
Not only is 200 a really nice round
number, it's the end of the Second Punic
War.
And this is where Rome really expands
beyond the borders of Italy to become a
small e empire,
which governed a whole bunch of
different nations and peoples and a huge
amount of land area. So this is where we
see the city-state that Rome had been
pretending to be kind of
fall apart as it was doing its best to
govern all of this new-found territory
with rules that were effectively made up
on the fly.
Yes. And a good thing to keep in mind is
when you approach this topic, usually
where you pick your starting date is a
reflection of sort of what agenda you
have going into this thing, right?
You're going to trace a certain theme
for why did the Republic fall? You might
pick an earlier date to pick up on
certain threads in history.
So for us, that's an important
disclaimer to talk about is
you know, throughout the centuries,
people have always looked back at Rome
and tried to draw parallels to the
modern day. Both the fall of Republic
and the fall of the Empire, every
subsequent empire after the fact has
been compared to Rome, and people try
and read the tea leaves therein. So for
our narrative, we're going to try and
not do that. So we're not really
interested in drawing parallels to the
American Republic or other modern
republics. It can be there. It's up to
the viewer to draw those parallels, but
that's not really our agenda.
We're mostly interested from an academic
perspective. And lastly, as you'll see
as we start to get into the details,
even if you did go in with an agenda of
trying to draw direct parallels, you're
going to have a hard time because more
often than not, things are just totally
different.
All right. So now that we're going to
establish the academic focus of this, we
do need to get some definitions out of
the way. The first one is going to be,
well, what even is a republic? What are
we talking about? And we have this in
two forms, both the modern definition of
we're using languish, what do we mean by
republic? So we'll start with a
dictionary definition, and then we'll
get into, well, is that actually
one-to-one to what the Romans were
thinking of a republic? So we'll start
with the dictionary definition.
Yeah. So when we say the word republic,
people think of what the modern type of
republic is, even if you don't
necessarily know the exact wording of
the definition. It's citizens of a
country electing representatives to some
sort of legislative or executive body to
make the laws and to carry them out.
That can take different forms, where we
have different parliamentary forms. Some
of them split off the executive branch.
Some of them have multiple branches of
of legislative branch. Generally, they
have a judicial branch. The This is just
generally the hallmarks of a republic,
where you elect representatives
who supposedly represent the citizens
underneath them, and those people make
the laws.
It's different from a direct democracy,
where the people themselves are making
the
voting on the laws and making those
laws.
But that is generally the recognizable
form.
Yes. And there can be overlap with
democracy. So very many different forms,
like you said.
Republic can be broad. But in the Roman
world, it turns out that republic is
more of kind of just this generic term
that they slap on top of their personal
recognition of how they want to govern
themselves. And that's kind of the root
of the term republic comes from res
publica. So you can talk on that. Yeah.
So res publica, again, it's just a
blanket term. It's not a specific
definition of a government, even though
that's where we got the word republic
from.
Res is just a nice blanket word. Just
means the stuff or the affair, and
publica is the public. So it's just a
public matter, the public affair. It's a
generic word for the government. It
doesn't actually refer to a type of
government per se.
The Roman government was not something
that we would recognize as a republic.
It was people who were electing
individual magistrates to do individual
roles. For example, the consuls were in
charge of the executive, like carrying
out the law, and they were in charge of
leading the armies of Rome. So it
wasn't necessarily you're electing,
you know, a couple of senators here and
there. The senators were appointed by a
censor who basically looked down the
rolls, generally of former magistrates,
and said, "Okay, all these guys are part
of the Senate." And the Senate was
technically an advisory body that would
just have very, very, very, very, very
um
convincing advice for the magistrates to
follow. The Senate did deal with some
day-to-day logistics and such, but it
was not
a senate as we know it.
And to give context to this, we'll be
going over the government of Rome from
sort of a ground-up understanding. So
when Rome gets founded, they don't have
much foresight in terms of, "Well, let's
come up with this very organized system
of government." No, it's very small.
It's practical. It grows out of just
we're a small tribe on a hill, and then
we're a couple of hills, and then we
have more growing population. So what do
they do? Well, it has practical origins,
and they set up a system of government
that gets stretched over time.
Systematically, as we'll see here in a
second, it favors the wealthy and the
powerful, and that's baked in. But
essentially, what you have is kind of
Rome's practical way of doing things is
they end up having roughly three
different major ways in which people
come together to vote to either elect
people or to make laws. And these are
grounded based off different ways that
their society function. So the first one
is going to be the tribal assembly. So
this is just based off essentially,
where do you live? So if we go to this
map of the city of Rome, you have these
different hills, you have these
different people who live in different
areas and have familial ties, and these
were kind of tribal things. And later
on, as you grew up in the city, you were
associated with a specific tribe. So
very geographic-based, it makes sense.
So where you at? Okay, you group of
people, you get to vote. So that's kind
of the tribal assembly.
That later gets expanded also where,
okay, now we have a bigger footprint
across sort of
wider Italy, and then how do we sprinkle
out the tribes? So that's kind of
geography dictates things for the tribal
assembly. The Plebeian Assembly is very
similar, except it's limited to just the
Plebeians. And then a final type of
assembly is going to be the Centuriate
Assembly, and this one is very much
based off just, okay, how much money do
you have? And
that is a reflection of how much, you
know, what's your kit going into war?
How do you get fielded as a militia body
and all that stuff? So those are the
different bodies and their practical
foundations that will get stretched over
time. But systematically, in each one,
there's going to be kind of baked into
the system this favoritism for the rich
and the powerful. And Chris, I think you
wanted to look at the Centuriate
Assembly and speak more specifically to
that one.
Yeah. So the Centuriate Assembly is the
one that's most focused on for a whole
lot of reasons. It was the one that
elected Rome's more senior and executive
magistrates, for example, the consuls.
So the the top people. And the
Centuriate Assembly was broken up into
170 196 centuries. The word century here
just means a group. It has no actual
foundation on the number of people.
The Each century was basically how much
money do you have? So the people who
could afford armor and a horse,
basically known as the equestrians, they
were the wealthiest, and they were
broken up into 18. These are the
hyper-wealthy. These are the richest
people in Rome.
Then you've got, you know, your first
class, second class, third class, fourth
class, fifth class. And each of these
are effectively how much armor can you
bring to the fight? So, you know, your
first class can bring a full suit of
armor, a helmet, shield, breastplate,
greaves, the whole nine yards. While the
fifth class, I mean, they could bring a
shield, maybe some sort of breastplate,
but they're not necessarily They're
going to be able to stand in a line with
a sword. But they're not necessarily
going to be able to do much more than
that. Even so, they are still among the
wealthiest people in Rome.
Somewhere between 95%
of the people are slotted into the
everyone else category. And that
effectively one vote for 95% of the
people. They effectively the voting was
done before they got to start voting. So
effectively it was disenfranchising
everyone except the hyper-wealthy. On
paper this kind of makes sense for you
know a city-state militia system where
the people who can actually fight are
the ones who are voting on who their
leader is going to be um basically based
on the contribute contributions to the
city.
That being said, it's not really great
when you're trying to actually represent
what the people want. So this starts
becoming uh pretty major flash point as
time goes on.
Yep, and this is going to be one of the
key stressors where already you're
starting to see oh we're kind of
building this republic on shaky ground.
How is this going to work uh as you get
more and more people there's going to be
tensions there. So keep that in the back
of your mind.
Uh lastly we're going to go here. Okay,
as we kind of cross this threshold we
just teased right now that there are
these early foundational issues.
How do we get from there to like oh the
republic is falling and collapsing? When
do you know you've crossed the Rubicon
of sort of the republic
crashing and burning? So um
is it a hard date or is it a gradual
process? Um Chris can talk through this
but there's merit to to essentially both
sides and we just wanted to flag that.
Yeah, so this is actually going to be a
major theme of this episode and frankly
the entire discussion is that
hard dates are really really really
useful but they're useful in a different
way than you might think. In you know in
school and university we often have to
memorize dates of like okay Caesar
crossed the Rubicon at X date that's the
date things happened. Uh Marius did his
Marian reforms on X date and that's the
date things happened but things evolved
up to that date that made it happen. The
the event itself is more of a symptom of
what's going on. It's not the actual
cause of it.
The Roman Republican system didn't just
flip from republic to empire the moment
Anthony died. It didn't flip when Julius
Caesar took power as a dictator. It
didn't flip when he was killed. It took
place over frankly as we're illustrating
here hundreds of years.
And with that disclaimer in mind uh
let's buzz through some quick dates and
some trends just to get us to the point
in time we want to look at. So right
here what we've done is we've laid out
the timeline of sort of the history of
Rome. So starting in 8th century we have
founding of the kingdom, the expulsion
of the kings in 509, a bunch of things
happening, we get to the end of the
republic, and then empire. And along the
way we've gone ahead and we've dotted
certain changes that are worth noting
and tracking. There's a lot more to it
but this one is pretty key and the main
thing to note here is uh there's two
major threads to keep in mind. The first
is uh that we're stretching that
practical city-level government as you
get further along into the republic into
something that's sort of a quasi empire.
So we're stretching this the government
and so we have some notes on that. And
the other one that is going to be is as
you stretch it it's going to expose the
tensions that exist between the rich and
poor and that might get addressed um
politically but increasingly it'll be
something that turns towards violence.
Um so yeah, Chris do you want to hit up
a couple notes here? Maybe some high
levels on how does the government change
from monarch to kind of consulship and
then we can get into some of the the the
minor tweaks. Yeah, so here again we're
just doing a quick speed run.
We're starting at two a one promise but
like this is how we get from point A to
point B. Rome started out as a kingdom
in its mytho-history back in 753 when
Romulus founded the city. Supposedly
there were only five kings.
Take that as you wish
uh and it essentially functioned as you
would expect a small city-state monarchy
to function. There was the king, he had
his counselors,
etc. etc. There ended up being a really
bad king and so the kings were tossed
out and the republic was established.
And when the republic was first
established they got uh
they effectively were like what if the
rich ran everything? So within a couple
of years
um
the vast majority of the people were
like hey this is dumb we're going on a
general strike until you guys actually
give us rights. And so that these are
known as the secessio plebis uh which
are the secession of the plebs when the
plebs basically all walk out of the city
to a nearby hill until the rich people
realize that they actually need human
beings to get anything done and there's
no point ruling a city if it doesn't
have anyone in it. So these reforms
basically shift the entirety of the
republic multiple times. So you have the
tribune of the plebs established and
curbs on abuses. You have the 12 tables
which are the foundation of all Roman
law that were established. You got the
plebians the right to marry people who
are outside of their class. Again, it's
a big deal when you can't do it.
You have uh the consulship eventually
got opened to plebians. You started
getting regulations on because it was a
in some ways they were effectively the
same people running for office over and
over and over again. You started seeing
regulations on how long it could take
between you being the consul over and
over again. Um and then you know you
slow slowly start seeing power shift
around uh whether it was more towards
the plebians and the equestrians uh or
frankly the tribunes of the plebs that
were established way back when. Uh one
thing I did want to highlight while I
was making this uh while I was making
this timeline is the word dictator. To
us it has a very significant
image that comes to mind whenever I say
the word dictator. It's one man with
ultimate power and authority who seizes
power and holds onto it basically as
long as he can.
The Roman definition of a dictator was
an entirely different thing. It was an
appointed
uh office when they decided that they
needed quick authority but only for you
know an actual emergency. Obviously we
we understand the word emergency can
start being diluted but for hundreds of
years here supposedly
um
these dictators actually followed the
rule of law. Where they did have
ultimate power and authority but only
for six months. And that six-month
period was considered to be enough to
get Rome out of whatever emergency it
was in.
So you know in the in the 5th century
you do see you see a few dictators and
you know you start seeing more and more
the later you get in the century. And
then from 400 to 300 there were 47
dictators. That's a dictator every other
year. So like it's you know it's like oh
hey it's a Tuesday there's another
dictator being appointed because there's
an emergency we're at war with someone
and things went bad. So it became a very
very very very common thing.
Some of these dictators were repeats,
some of them were different people. They
all gave up their power basically when
the emergency was finished. They didn't
necessarily stay the entire six months.
This is where you have the story of
Cincinnatus who very famously just
reluctantly took on the dictatorship
until the emergency was over and then he
gave it up instantly and he did it again
twice more.
So then you start seeing in the 3rd
century there's still a bunch of
dictators, you know 24 dictators in 100
years. That's you know one every four
years but that's you know half as many
as the century before that. And then in
the 2nd century you don't see any
dictators which we'll get to later but
you don't ever see anyone take that
power. You don't ever see Rome declare
such an emergency that needs a dictator.
And so you
interestingly the slowing down of the
number of dictators is kind of
indicative of where power is kind of
shifting and becoming more and more
murky and less focused on the good of
the city.
Yeah, so just to step back and kind of
reiterate a lot of what Chris said. Uh
hopefully you're seeing here the once
more important threads of hey we're
stretching the city government over
time. You could see rights being given
to the plebians through blood, sweat,
and tears often times but it's really
stretching out of a need to restrain the
magistracy or carve out uh rights for
the general public. And it's also being
re- reinforced by the rich and the poor.
So that's very interesting but during
this whole period this is when we would
say that this is a healthy republic. But
uh conversely to that idea there's
actually a lot of dictators. And so that
is opposite to what you would think for
a republic. So all of this to me is
keeping in mind why um if you just
tackle the subject at surface level why
you can fall into a lot of pitfalls by
trying to directly compare ancient Rome
to republics of today or yesteryear.
There's a lot of dynamics that um seem
contradictory. But yeah, that's why we
wanted to cover it. So hopefully this
gives you some of the nuance and context
uh before we really get into the meat
and potatoes of the republic truly
falling apart.
And as we get into this period
essentially the two things that were the
problem earlier stretching a city
government and the divide between rich
and poor gets even worse during this
era. And that's why we've chosen to
focus on it. So again, there's extreme
growth of the city from controlling
small regions of Italy to most of the
Mediterranean. And then the gap between
rich and poor therein
uh you essentially have you know like a
K-shaped economy. The wealthy do really
well and the poor not so much. So that
is going to stretch us to the breaking
point. And to really show why that's the
case we've actually broken out a
separate timeline that really looks at
the sequence of events that take place
in this era.
All right, so what we've done with this
graphic here is essentially taken this
period of interest and blowed it out.
And this is what would probably you know
appear if you looked at Wikipedia for
the history of Rome, is you would find
all these dates happening and it's
really too much to conceptualize and
it's actually not all that relevant to
get into the blow-by-blow. Um but just
the scale of it is what we wanted to
portray here before we go into some of
the underlying factors and and themes.
So this is mostly about just portraying
the scale of things. So on one end Chris
here has laid back-to-back essentially
all the wars, ton of wars, and some
important social shake-ups that are
happening in this time of about 150
years just to give you a sense of just
kind of the rapidity of everything. So
Chris maybe hit on a couple points
before we uh kind of take a step back
and look more at some uh some broader
trends.
Yeah, so again this is mostly just
something that uh gives you a visual
idea of this was an actually insane 200
years to have to live through. Uh there
was a lot going on and it never calms
down. The Roman Republic was at war
almost perpetually throughout these
entire 200 years. Not everything that
was going on is included on this
timeline because there simply isn't
space.
But while all of these wars were
happening, major events were happening
at home that shaped everything that was
going on within the Roman electorate and
kind of what the average person on the
ground was actually seeing and feeling.
Whereas most of these wars were, you
know, far away and they brought great
stories home etc. etc. etc.
And I mean the the problems started
mounting up and that's what we're going
to be getting into today.
Yeah, and a major question here is well,
okay, you have this war, Rome ends up
winning them, what do you do with that
territory that you administer? So
awfully there often there's a tight
coupling between the wars and the social
problems. Oh my god, okay, there's the
end of the Second Punic War, we need
governors or people to administer these
provinces. Oh my god, these people are
enriching themselves off of these
provinces. We need to have courts that
can handle extortion of governors. And
so there's this ping-ponging back and
forth. Uh yeah, the interplay between
these. So it's uh it's a reactionary
period for sure.
Yeah, and this is kind of what we were
saying earlier where this is a
government that basically got patched up
depending on the needs of the day and
not necessarily with any long-term
foresight involved.
Yes. And with that let's try and reel it
back away from the timelines and look
more at some trends.
So here are going to be the major trends
that we want to follow in sequence. The
first one is going to be birth of
empire. So this is a closer look at the
territorial acquisitions of Rome. Then
that poses a question, well, what
happens when a militia can't go home?
That's going to cause issues at home and
abroad. And then finally what happens
with this massive influx of wealth from
all these expansions and the fact that
the everyday citizen can't really go
home when it's at war.
Uh this causes a monopoly to go wild.
And then finally at the end this causes
all sorts of issues and how do you
manage this empire with the rules of a
primitive city? And that is going to tee
us up for eventually the collapse of the
Republic.
But with that being said, let's go ahead
and start with the first theme which is
going to be the birth of an empire. How
does Rome go from a small city-state to
conquering uh essentially all of the
Mediterranean? So this is a subject of
many other videos, but just really
quickly, essentially you have Rome here,
local city-state, it takes them a long
time to expand out its territory, but
eventually it takes it bits and pieces
over uh various wars to glom onto the
rest of Italy. Uh the way Rome does this
is not
governing everything directly. It's a
system of essentially unequal alliances
that it enters into for these various
people and it binds them to Rome's will
and tries to tap into them for its
military. Um eventually
we'll get into the Punic War here, but
eventually Rome does expand and keeps
trying to apply this elsewhere. But the
more and more it goes to war,
uh the easier it is to keep that machine
turning and churning and finding other
reasons to get into another war both for
the sake of, well, we have this club,
might as well keep beating people with
it, and oh, look at all this gold that
falls out every time I club someone. So
there's a lot of reasons to keep going
to war, but the major one that's going
to be the reason we started is going to
be the Second Punic War. Uh Chris will
touch on this, but this one is more key
in sort of pushing Rome to expand
because of the implications of the sort
of power vacuum that happens when Rome
comes out triumphant, but then also this
sort of existential fear that seems to
guide a lot of Rome's uh politicians.
Yeah, so the Second Punic War, again,
just to step back and frame it because
it's difficult in some ways when you're
looking at timelines things get so neat
and easily and you're like, "Ah, yes,
this time period is the Second Punic
War."
Hannibal invaded Italy and stayed there
for 20 years. He was in Italy for longer
than he ever was in Carthage or Spain
for that matter.
He ravaged the land for 20 years
straight. You could have been born
before, you know, after he'd invaded and
you'd be in the army by the end and you
probably would have fought against him,
you know, in his final battle over Zama.
He was in Italy for a long time and what
he was doing there was he was
effectively ravaging the south of Italy.
If you look at the map that we have uh
with regards to Roman conquest of Italy,
you'll notice that the later conquests
are all in the south. And that's where
Hannibal was targeting. He was trying to
break away all of these city-states from
Roman control.
Remember again, this is, while, you
know, maps paint all of Italy red
because
like it's nice, easy, okay, Rome
controls all of they are pirates. They
have been pirates for hundreds of years.
That's what they do. They are pirates.
They prey on mainly the Italians cuz
they're right there. There's a lot of
money and it's easy. So the Romans, you
know, have to station soldiers there
because hey, how do you get rid of
pirates? Well, you station your army
there and they can go to war with the
pirates who, you know, regularly started
rebellions.
The Gauls, which were a people most
people think of Gaul as like modern-day
France.
Go The Gauls had tribes up in northern
Italy. Like this these were called the
uh Cisalpine Gauls, the Gauls on this
side of the Alps. And that was all
northern Italy was Gauls. And so the
Romans basically had a constant fight
going on with them until they were
shoved out.
And then you have the strip of land
between Spain and Italy. That was called
uh that was a part of Gaul and the
Romans wanted to have that little strip
of land for, you know, safe passage. So
they had more wars against the Gauls.
You're kind of seeing where this is
going where they have all these internal
wars to try to
uh suppress the people in these areas
that they had conquered.
Those wars sometimes spilled out to
become slightly more exterior wars, but
they really started in the provinces
where the Romans had to uh suppress uh
discontent.
Yes, and this is stuff that we've
covered in other videos, but to really
quickly hit on it, uh
as Rome expands to the east, they're
going to rub shoulders with the Greeks.
They have their own successor wars going
on and you're going to entangle
yourselves in a larger situation the
second you start dealing with Greek
affairs. So yeah, there's the successor
states, the Seleucid War, etc. that you
get roped into. And then the ever
fractious wars to the north in the
so-called barbarian regions. So, just a
lot of conflict here. And I know we
haven't spent much time describing
Rome's militia at this period, but yes,
it is a militia. People are raised every
year. Technically, they're supposed to
put down arms and farm the land, but you
can see with what we've covered here,
there's really not much time for that
when there is so much to be done uh on
the war-making front.
Yeah, exactly. And
um
we don't have, you know, modern
transport systems in the ancient world.
I realize this is, you know,
self-explanatory, but if you're sending
an army to Greece, it's going to take a
while for that army to come home. So,
it's really just easier to have them
winter in Greece at a certain point in
time.
But unfortunately, if they can't come
home and, you know, deal with their
farms, what do you do? I mean, you
obviously have to send them
reinforcements and supplies, and that's
a whole uh supply chain management
system that the Romans really have to
confront and deal with and develop
effectively out of thin air.
So, now we can ask the question, what
happens when this militia force can't go
home because of all the aforementioned
wars?
Um we're going to start off by just kind
of establishing, okay, what is the Roman
army system in this period? Uh
generally speaking, and then how is it
being forced to adapt because of the
kind of grander wars taking place? What
are the new requirements of these
soldiers in this area that very much
looks like an empire? And then what does
this all mean for the families of
soldiers back home? Because this is not
what they signed up for initially.
So, from the start uh rules of the Roman
army, again, this is somewhat well
understood, but a lot of it is a gray
area because it changes a lot. But, if
you squint, basically, it's a manipular
legion that is a militia that gets
called up annually, and it's broken out
into different tiers based off kind of
socio-economic classes, and then they
fight in a particular manner with
reserves and all that stuff. We're not
going into the tactics, but broadly
speaking, it's a militia system that's
called up annually, and they're not paid
much. Although eventually, they might.
But, Chris um maybe round us off with
this just quick intro. Yeah, so again,
not to belabor the point too much, we
have a militia system here. The men were
called up in the month of March, and
they were assembled on the Field of
Mars. And then they would go off to
whatever war the that Rome was waging at
this particular point in time. They were
supposed to return home in October for,
you know, very ceremonial disbanding and
uh purification of their weapons, etc.
etc. etc. But, when you got a whole
bunch of guys in Greece, you can't
necessarily just yank them home every
October and send them back out every uh
in March because you're just going to
have lose all of the ground that you
initially made. So, as time passed, you
start seeing the rules get stretched,
where it's like, well, you know, you
might be on deployment for a couple of
years or maybe a few years. It depends
on you'll you'll be on deployment for
however long this war lasts as opposed
to you're on deployment from March to
October.
Um
so, you really start seeing these rules
get strained. The real rules get moved
around depending on what's necessary.
And so, you start seeing, you know,
okay, well, how do you garrison all of
these provinces? And how do you manage a
standing army? And so, that's what we're
going to go go ahead and get into next.
All right, here we go. So, the life of a
soldier in this period is very different
than what they signed up for. Where
actually in the early days of Rome, it's
like, okay, guys, let's meet in the
field and let's go rustle some cattle
from the neighbors or let's go harass
them. Uh we are far gone from the early
days. This is very much a different
beast unto itself. So, Chris has broken
this out into uh well, there's a lot of
garrison duty now. There's a lot of
these very distant foreign wars to be
involved in. And increasingly, because
of the former two, we have to adopt a
lot of professional standards that just
kind of fall out of this. So, Chris,
maybe walk us through these uh these
briefly. Yeah, so uh as you guys might
have gotten from what I said previously,
a militia is not meant to be a garrison.
A garrison is meant to be soldiers who
are fortified in a certain region, who
are there for, you know, particular
reason, generally for defensive
purposes, for a long period of time.
These were people whose deployments
would be measured in years, not in weeks
or months. Militias don't do so well as
garrisons simply because they want to go
home. They're not uh standing army. They
weren't meant to be a standing army, and
a garrison is a standing army thing. So,
you start seeing
issues spark up with that. Um the Roman
army did a great job at suppressing
dissent, you know, generally by
murdering everybody who dissented, but
they weren't necessarily made to do
this. And then on top of that,
um
one of the big illustrations you have of
the professionalization is these wars
against uh the Macedonians and the
Seleucids. And you have, you know, tens
of thousands of soldiers being deployed
to Greece for years at a time. And
there's often actually a pattern you see
with that, where you have all these
fresh troops go off to Greece, and
they're all, you know, gung-ho for
beating those rich Greeks and taking all
of their stuff, and then they lose a
battle, and it's terrible and it's
tragic. The consul gets recalled and a
new one sent out. He brings
reinforcements. He spends the first few
months training those people. And then
when they're all trained, ready to go,
then they go off on a fight for a few
more years to beat their opponents.
One thing you might notice here is that
is not the pattern of a militia. A
militia is supposed to go home. A
militia is supposed to get disbanded and
re- recreated, etc. etc. etc. This is
much much more similar to a standing
army that is being recruited for, okay,
we're recruiting you for years at a time
because this campaign is necessarily
going to take years. You're going to
learn to winter camp. We are going to
have to supply you through the winters,
etc. etc. etc. So, you see all these
strains really start to pop up there.
And presumably, though this isn't
recorded as much, the lower ranks of the
army,
uh I believe it was the centurions in
this period were kind of voted upon as
opposed to being an official position. I
think they were voted upon when the
troops mustered. But now, when you're
deployed in the field for long periods
of time, you can start to probably see
the sort of upper crust of the army or
the logistical experts, they start to
become sort of semi-professionals, even
though no one has really created that
position. You just kind of form this
natural hierarchy and specialization
because you've been deployed for so
long. So, we're starting to get to a
point where it'll it'll
kind of start to sound and quack like a
professional duck here. Exactly. And
that's that's the thing um
again, just
harkening back really fast, you see
these trends start happening.
The Marian reforms, etc.
This is where you see them start.
So, this is all from the soldier's
perspective, uh having been deployed for
a long time. Now, you essentially have a
almost a career out of this thing, even
though you're not paid by it. Uh what
does this all mean for the soldier back
home? So, the ideal Roman was sort of
this kind of farmer soldier. You see a
lot of that with the Greek city-states.
Um you fight for your territory because
you have a stake in it, because you're a
farmer, and that's what you go do in the
off year. Um but when the soldiers are
away, you have to have their estate take
care of it. So, that falls onto the
family to do that, potentially some
slaves or some overseers. But, you can
only really do that for so long before
debts accumulate and the family has to
sell the land and move on or you have to
take other desperate measures. So, this
is a lot of strain uh to put on society.
So, Chris, maybe walk us through a
little bit more of the nuance here.
Yeah, exactly. Um
and like I'm I'm going to sound like
broken record here. This is a militia
system. These men are supposed to
they're, you know, called up in March
and they go home in October.
That means that they're expecting to
actually winter with their family.
They're getting they're going to get the
housework done. They're going to plant
the crops. They're going to harvest the
crops.
And that's kind of how they're able to
do things. When you take him out of the
equation, the family basically is short
a huge amount of its labor force. The
women and children can do what they can,
and sometimes like they're able to
survive for years, but they can't
survive
like that forever, especially when the
man is not particularly making very much
money being
over the ocean somewhere. So, they're
struggling to do the best they can to
maintain the household and to settle
stuff. And oh, maybe they get slightly
behind on the money because they
couldn't plant as much this year because
the man who was supposed to be doing the
planting was never home. So, the
planting the crops started becoming
smaller and smaller, which means your
income becomes smaller. When your income
becomes smaller, maybe you have to take
out a loan to just pay for some
immediate bills, you know, the roof
needs to be repaired, you your tools
need to be repaired, you need to buy
food for your family. Um
and as those loans build up,
then you start seeing
people fall into debt more and more and
more. And when you fall into enough
debt, you can be forced to sell off your
farm. And so, people started selling off
their farms to, you know, wealthy
landowners who would buy them. And those
families would then move to the city,
where they would desperately try to find
some sort of job. Because the wealthy
landowners were not going to hire
citizens, cuz citizens were expensive.
So, you kind of start seeing this
movement from the
uh from the agrarian society into a more
urban society, but that's not
necessarily a natural or a good thing in
uh in this period.
And it creates an incentive also. So,
not just are people kind of increasingly
poor, but this fight to try to hold onto
your land is a carrot that generals and
politicians can now offer their people.
Oh, you're poor and you want to be a a
farmer, you want to get the land that's
owed to you? Well, fight for me and I
will dawn out some some favors to you.
Um or support me as a politician, help
me become rich and powerful, and and
give you some of that land back. So, you
have like agrarian reforms become kind
of front and center on the political
sphere. And then later you have kind of
some of the powerful people who lead
armies like Caesar and other who do so
with promising their soldiers land
grants. So, not only are you
impoverishing people, but they're you're
kind of creating this system of
incentives where uh well, you can enrich
politicians or you know, it's a turn to
populism sort of from the generals and
the politicians. Exactly. And it starts
actually becoming very popular during
this period of time for politicians to
promise jobs to people which, you know,
still a very popular thing to do is
promise people jobs. People like having
jobs. And these The thing is these jobs
were generally mostly temporary. They
were construction projects. So, you
start seeing large-scale aqueducts be
built because the city needed water
anyway and so, you know, give people
jobs by building the aqueducts. You have
temples and baths and arenas starting to
be built and theaters. And so, you you
see all these major projects and they're
great, but the problem with construction
projects is that they have an end date.
They are not a permanent form of
employment and so, you have so many
people who are clamoring for these
relatively limited jobs. You're not
going to have construction forever. So,
you know, you do have construction
projects happening all the time, but
they have an end state to them. And so,
it's not necessarily the most stable
form of employment.
Yep. And when there is a big onrush of
labor, uh then the pay for the labor
drops. So, supply and demand kicks in
all sorts of issues.
So, this leads us to the next point here
which is okay.
You have labor is struggling. Well,
someone is benefiting from the system
and it's going to be the rich and the
powerful. So, this gets us into the next
topic of Monopoly Gone Wild. So, the
major points that we'll be hitting here
is
uh
yeah, sort of this K-shaped economy, who
is benefiting from the system, and then
the major trend of having these kind of
centralization, consolidation, uh in one
sense from land ownership, but also it
expands to a bunch of other domains of
the Roman world. And that's going to lay
the seeds for
um
yeah, fall of Republic when you have
power consolidated by different groups
of people or outside of the traditional
institutions. So, yeah, let's go ahead
and get started with the the topic here,
Monopoly Gone Wild. So, in this first
section we'll be covering some of the
early stressors. So, what this means
essentially, well, we just talked about
how the empire is expanding, there's a
lot of profits from that and it leads to
well, distribution of wealth that is
very different. So, it's sort of this
K-shaped economy that you hear a lot
about today. And some of the ways you
can see that is going to be the
distribution of power. If you look at
the kind of roles of the consulships,
it's very much monopolized within a
certain number of families. And real
quickly we'll be talking about well,
there's this ancestral wealth and power.
The rich get richer and richer. But then
also, there are some opportunities. So,
some people do break away from sort of
the middle or the lower tiers and they
create a new class so kind of the the
novo homo, the new men, the equestrians
and they're going to clamor for power
and that is actually this opportunity to
get rich and powerful is going to lead
to well, maybe they will try and get
even more rich and powerful and usurp
the power of the old senatorial class
and maybe we'll turn to populism. So, it
kind of adds fuel to the fire of
everything that's going on.
So, Chris kind of double back on this
topic and yeah, let's talk a little bit
more depth here. Yeah, so we really
start see seeing um all these people who
are forced to sell their property.
If you have to sell your property,
there's going to be someone who buys
that property. And people who buy the
property are effectively the wealthy
investors. So, think of landlords who
are able to buy up entire blocks, you
know, or slum lords or however you put
it.
These people are doing that, but with
farms. So, they're basically taking all
these small family farms and turning
them into vast estates, like massive
massive plantations. And so, you have
all these people
who get to make more money because they
have more money, so they can use that
money to make more money. Secondly,
Roman conquests overseas were very very
very very very profitable. You're
effectively going into a place, taking
all of their stuff,
killing a significant number of the
people who live there, and then
well, maybe your family knows somebody
who knows somebody or maybe your family
is a politician and you get to be the
governor of that place and continue to
tax the heck out of it. And a whole
bunch of that money goes straight into
your pockets. So, you start seeing this
enormous explosion of wealth among the
upper class of Rome.
There are actually anti-luxury laws that
really become popular during this period
because you have all of these Roman
aristocrats who are just becoming
enormously wealthy at the expense of
effectively everyone else.
Uh so, you start seeing these wealthy
people, you know, just get more and more
and more wealthy and they effectively
make up their own class. Money becomes
much more of a political currency than
just having a nice name. Although, if
you take a deep look at this chart over
here that I've included,
a name was very important and uh
political power in Rome was effectively
concentrated among 10 different
families, give or take. It was almost
always going to be one of these people
who was one of the consuls for any given
year.
Uh meanwhile, the poor got much much
poorer because remember how I was saying
construction projects aren't really, you
know, a stable source of income? More
and more men would just go just decide
to be in the military for years on end
because that was the only job that was
stable and consistent and very very
predictable. Rome was always at war, so
sure, we'll just stay in the militia,
you know, until uh the cows come home.
So, you start really seeing this
diversion between the rich and the poor.
And the the Romans always had this
massive gap between the rich and the
poor. This was starting to make it a lot
worse and the poor were starting to
effectively be priced out of living
for lack of a better term. And you know,
being able to eat and drink and have a
house over or a roof over your head.
Those were really popular things.
So, with these dynamics in play, let's
actually look at some of the major
things that the rich were doing in terms
of well, using their wealth to get
wealthier. So, Chris here has identified
the latifundia and well, what happens
with public land when people could just
throw around money and connections to
gobble everything up? So, Chris, maybe
talk us a little bit through some of
these detail of what actually is the the
sort of latifundia which is the the
major one that people call upon when it
comes to ancient consolidation. Yeah, so
these latifundia were the great
plantations that I mentioned earlier.
It's a whole bunch of family farms that
all got smooshed together and turned
into one big estate. And these estates
were, you know, large-scale profit
essentially manufacturing companies.
What they would do is they would
minimize their expenses. So, they would
hire itinerant workers, foreigners, and
slaves. They would not hire citizens
because citizens actually cost money and
had rights and we don't like those in
this house. So, we're not going to
bother with those. We're just going to
hire the cheap labor as much as humanly
possible or buy it in the case of
slaves. These latifundia then would They
wouldn't grow, you know, the cheap crops
because that doesn't make as much of a
profit margin. As uh one Roman historian
who I think is hilarious, uh his name is
Cato the Elder,
uh said in uh in his texts, uh when it
comes to farming,
the most profitable thing to produce is
cows. Second most profitable thing to
produce is also cows and the third most
profitable thing is cows, but badly. And
then I suppose the fourth would be wine.
So, you have all these estates, you
know, being cattle ranchers and some
vineyards. That's not exactly a balanced
diet that the poor can afford. So, food
started getting more expensive for those
people. The rich didn't particularly
care because the rich were making more
money. It's all focused on profit and
not on the public good. So, this is
effectively destroying Rome's entire
tradition of farmers and landholders.
It's really affecting Rome's food supply
and it's completely upending, you know,
any chance of having money and or power
that these people have. And again, most
of what people want isn't necessarily,
you know, huge amount of money or power.
They want stability. They want the
ability to live their life.
The rich were not necessarily focused on
caring about little things like that.
They wanted the best for themselves.
And so, you start seeing this clash
happen. And then the Romans and their
politicians start identifying, "Hey,
all this Roman land is basically already
consolidated. You know, all these
little small number of landholders are
controlling most of Rome's actual land,
but but but but but but but, we have all
of this land that's called the public
land. And this is land that was
controlled by those allies that I
mentioned earlier. You know, the client
states.
And they still have people living on
that land, but they're not Roman
citizens. So, they don't actually count
as people, right? So, why don't we take
that land and give it to the Romans who
are unemployed? That's seems like a
normal and great thing to do. We can
redistribute the land and that way
there'll be enough land for all the
Roman citizens. We aren't going to think
too hard about what the people on the
land actually care about because again,
they're not Roman citizens and therefore
they don't matter.
One thing you'll notice in this little
uh in this map that I included down here
is all of that public land is in the
south of Italy. You know, that place
where Hannibal was ravaging for 20 years
telling all of these city-states Rome
was a terrible overlord and they should
break their alliances with Rome.
Well, Rome decided that uh the south of
Italy was a great place to have farms
and they were going to take away all of
their land.
This would lead to a lot of hurt
feelings.
>> [laughter]
>> To put it really, really, really mildly.
Yes, and this leads to things, um,
the allies aren't happy, you have social
wars, internal unrest,
allies turning upon allies. So, yeah, a
fractured neighbor both in the social
order and in Rome's systems of
alliances. Uh, a lot of this is starting
to kind of teeter and become
destabilized.
So,
that's the major trend as as we would
see it that's pushing us towards this
fall of the Republic.
But as a last thing, there is, okay, you
know, trying to bind all of these
problems over time has been this sort of
rules of the city, which is, okay,
there's the pressure, the government
tries to solve it because it kind of has
to to keep living. So, the final point
we'll take here is, well, to what extent
has Rome been able to curb the excesses
of everything going wrong before with
the rules of the city? And maybe are we
finally getting to the point where it's
just no longer possible. So, that's
going to be the final through line that
we'll be coming up here uh, to close out
this section of our discussion of uh,
the fall of the Republic.
So, we'll be going over, well,
rise of populism, the Gracchi brothers
being sort of emblematic of that and
their death sort of signaling a turn of
how we handle disagreements within the
uh, the Republic. And then towards the
end here, we're going to lead into,
well, sort of okay, now that we've kind
of
done away with rules and norms, sort of
anything becomes possible. And once you
throw open those doors, uh, things
quickly unravel. So, that is the course
we'll be plotting here for the final
section. But let's go ahead and go back
to, yeah, rules of the city and maybe
getting into
sort of populism here. The main idea
here is essentially, um, what we're
seeing before is
people have tried to work within the
system of government. We've seen that.
They try and expand their rights, they
try and petition, they try and do
strikes, sometimes they take up arms.
There's different means that people have
tried to work within the system, but
it's really not working and it's not
working at an increasingly rapid pace.
Populism here in the Roman context is
this idea that, um, well, we have
mechanisms where people can become
popular and using the people in these
different voting assemblies, they can
try and push their agendas through.
There are no real political parties in
this era, but really in this period, a
lot of what people are championed on is
can you get something done for me now,
immediately, because I'm in pain. In the
past, it used to be sort of name
recognition, who do we think can manage
this war better, did they do a lot of
stuff for throwing good games or having
good public works, sort of like that. A
lot of game, uh, who who is the most
popular. But now, most pressingly is
going to be voting on people who can
really say, "I'm going to be the
champion to your cause." So, that is
sort of populism in this context that
we're going to be focusing on here. And
really, when it comes to managing an
empire within the rules of the city,
what we're going to see with this trend
of populism is it's really the Gracchi
brothers who lead the charge.
And what they find is, well,
uh, how can we sort of work within the
rules of the city, but really bend them
to our advantage? Because otherwise, if
we try and follow standard procedure,
it's going to be gummed up like it's
been for centuries. So, that is the
trend we'll be following here. So,
Chris, I'll let you walk us through sort
of the introduction of the Gracchi
brothers and how they start to sort of
shake up the way things are done for,
um, yeah, populism and and changing the
laws of the city.
Yeah, so the brothers Gracchus are
really the poster child for Roman
populism at this point in time. And
effectively, what that means is they use
what sounds like a really nice promise
that actually talks about a problem that
people have and they will take that to
its, you know, logical extreme
to get elected, to get power and to get
what they want.
So, in some ways,
it's a good thing because the people's
problems are actually being looked at.
In other ways, those are not actually
solutions to the problems that uh, that
exist.
So, you start seeing, you know, you
start seeing people who are just
desperate for anything,
for jobs, for money, for anything. And
so, you the the city's actually being
run by gangs at this point. Um, and so
Tiberius comes in, he's the older
brother, and he says, "Hey, vote for me
and I will take all that Roman public
land that's totally not being used,
guys." Ignoring the people who are on it
because they're not citizens and
therefore they don't matter.
We're going to take all that Roman
public land and we're going to give it
to the people of Rome as it should be,
true land for true Romans. And so, you
know, this is a very popular initiative
because people really like the option of
having land and having the ability to
live. So, they're like, "Great, this
this guy sounds like a
true Roman." And so, uh, he gets
elected. He gets voted in by the popular
assembly, which again, going all the way
back, is the most egalitarian assembly
that Rome has. No patricians and also
technically, you know, just uh, broken
down by tribe. Supposedly, it's
relatively equal.
I'm not going to get into too, too, too,
too many weeds on that.
So, what
Tiberius does when he first gets
elected, he says, "Okay, I'm going to
impose my veto." So, the tribune has a
veto. It's a sacred veto, basically, he
can say no to anything, any legislation,
any action by the Roman government. He
can just say no. He can stand in the
way.
And so, he declares that he will stand
in the way of everything until his
legislation is taken into account, voted
and um,
uh, uh, an a
an agrarian reform is actually uh,
enacted.
And then, he takes this law directly to
the people. He ignores the Senate, he
ignores the magistrates, he just takes
it to the popular assembly and says,
"Hey, guys,
we're going to vote on this law.
The people themselves are going to vote
on this law and when it gets passed, we
will enforce this law ourselves. We're
going to ignore all of the normal
procedures for making a Roman law
and we're just going to go ahead and
pass it."
And, you know, all these people in the
Senate are like, "What, you can't do
that. You have to, you know, you have to
get consent from the Senate." He's like,
"Under what law?
There is no law that
forces that. There's only norms and
norms aren't laws, those can be
ignored." So, he just goes ahead and
ignores the norms and gets his stuff
shoved through his own way. The people
love this law uh, and obviously, they
vote it right in. And so, this agrarian
reform is established and we do actually
have records and uh, remains from this
agrarian reform where they went through
the south of Italy and they were
charting out land. They were charting
out a huge amount of land that could
hypothetically
go to the people of Rome.
Well, then, Tiberius tried to get
reelected because the people loved him
and so that, you know, obviously, they
would only want him to be reelected.
The Pontifex Maximus of Rome thought
that this was beyond the pale.
Absolutely not. Uh, all the aristocracy
of Rome were appalled by this because
there was supposedly a 10-year window
between people getting reelected to the
same office. And so, when he, you know,
was in the middle of
the uh, in the middle of the forum
getting reelected by, you know, all
these people, the Pontifex Maximus
himself uh, dedicated himself in a in a
sacred ritual declaring loudly, uh,
"Qui rem publicam saluam esse volunt me
sequatur. If anyone wishes to save the
Republic, follow me." And so, he charged
at uh, Tiberius Gracchus summoning this
mob and these mob this mob, which is
basically armed with bench legs and
paving stones, beat all of Tiberius
Gracchus' supporters to death including
Gracchus himself.
Which didn't go over super well with the
people who really loved him.
As you might imagine.
So, um, this uh,
this um,
Pontifex actually gets exiled,
supposedly. He gets a cushy position
over in Greece
uh, and eventually dies there. But the
point is, the
uh, precedents were set. A, the tribune
has effectively unlimited power anytime
he wants. B, the popular assembly has
way more power than anyone ever uh,
allowed them or expected them to have.
And C,
well, norms can be ignored if you really
feel like it.
And so, an uneasy decade passes. The
agrarian
um, the agrarian commission is actually
doing its job. It's starting to, you
know, redistribute some land to some
Romans. It's actually doing what
Tiberius said it was going to do, just
slowly.
And so, Tiberius' younger brother,
Gaius, comes into the scene and he does
the exact same thing that his older
brother did,
but with more.
More stuff added to it. Uh, so Gaius
declares that A, he's going to make sure
this agrarian reform goes through
because all of these aristocrats are
trying to slow walk it, which, let's be
honest, they probably are. He's also
declaring, "I'm going to reform the
grain supply and make sure that the
price of grain becomes standardized
through the year."
Which is a great proposition for what
it's worth. The execution, eh.
And finally, he's like, "Okay, all of
these patricians, all of these noble
families are the ones who are in charge
of our entire legal system. They're
abusing us. They are the ones keeping us
down. We're going to reform the judicial
system with plebians."
What he fails to mention is the plebians
he's talking about are the equestrian
class. And the equestrians are just the
rich people who have all the political
capital these days anyway.
So, he gets elected because it's great
promises. It all sounds wonderful.
Hooray! So, he does the exact same thing
as his older brother. He blocks all
legislation until his stuff is voted on.
He takes it directly to the people and
ignores all of the normal ways to get a
law passed. And so, you know, he
passes another agrarian reform, which
effectively is just performative. He
passes a reorganization of the Roman
justice system, which puts equestrians
in charge of all the juries, which
For For context, it sounds like a
relatively minor thing, but when you put
bankers in charge of the juries around
banking fraud and corruption and tax
farming, none of that stuff actually
gets
None of There's no actual
justice being applied to these people.
These corruption
corruption trials just become a farce.
And it's a huge benefit to these wealthy
people who basically can just
turn the corruption up to 11.
And then, finally, this
the grain standardization. Again, on
paper, it's great. And for the people of
Rome, it was definitely better than what
it was earlier, where you'd have these
massive spikes in grain prices that were
capitalized on by the rich people who
just wanted to make more money depending
on, you know, the harvest or the season
or just, you know, if a boat sank on the
way to Rome.
So, effectively what this law did was
just created a massive grain bank. And
so, when grain was cheap, the Roman
state would buy a whole bunch of grain
to fill the grain bank. And then, when
grain was sparse, the Roman government
would sell from the grain bank so that
way the price would remain stable. It
was a very like it was a very smart
system.
And of course, all of the money that was
made during that enterprise went
straight to the wealthy people who owned
enough farms and stuff to contribute to
the grain supply or to the governors who
had their provinces sending grain to
Rome.
So, he made a whole bunch of very
populist and popular promises that just
coincidentally ended up doing nothing
but helping his very wealthy friends.
He actually ran for a second term, and
he won. And his big promise for the
second term was colonizing Carthage
after it had been destroyed. That was
actually not as popular as he thought it
was, and he lost his election for a
third term.
But, he really wanted to be in office
for that third term. So, what he had is
he had his own personal gang, and they
swarmed the election area and chased
everyone else out so that he could rig
the ballots himself.
The Senate, seeing this, declared that
there was an emergency. And the only way
this emergency could be solved was for
the consul to take a militia and to
storm this this place where Gracchus had
hold himself up.
The consul did that. Everyone was
killed.
And that thus ends
the story of the Gracchus brothers who
upended Roman politics.
>> [snorts]
>> And this tees us up for the final
chapter of well, things are going to
start to unravel. But some quick again,
highlights of what Chris has mentioned
here, populism is something that people
are increasingly turning to because of
the pain.
They see that the system is gummed up.
There are politicians who want to take
advantage of that for better or for
worse. They get into power riding this
sense of like, I'm going to solve your
problems. They then have to bypass the
established powers that be using kind of
nuances or bendings of the rules, which
shatters norms. In doing so, they do get
some stuff done, but often times
the
balance of who benefits is some for the
people, most of it for just a different
class of wealthy people. So,
populism is somewhat usurped, but still
there is now a tension between the old
powers and the new powers, and these are
going to be reactionary, sort of
attacking each other, and that ends up
in these different instances of
bloodshed and breaking of norms sort of
within the city. There's the idea of
pomerium, no weapons in the city. This
is respected the first time around with
the death of the first Gracchi brother,
but in the second one, by this point,
there's arms in the city, and I believe
he's killed with a sword and his
followers are. So, you see how things
are getting worse and worse as each side
is kind of reacting to the other. And
this all then tees us up for the next
turning of the ratchet, which is this
brave new world of norms are really no
longer what binds you. It's really just
can you
get enough popular support and can you
kind of finagle the political system to
just force things through, and who's
going to stop you? So, that's the world
we're we're getting into here as we end
this first set up of the fall of the
Republic. There'll be a whole second
part where we get into sort of the blow
by blow of what this looks like. But
Chris, maybe walk us through this final
little chapter here as we as we tee this
up. Yeah, so what we've really started
seeing is throughout this entire period
of time, something happens and the Roman
state has to deal with it. And usually
what they do is they put in a band-aid.
And the problem with just tossing more
band-aids on top of band-aids is you
never actually solve the underlying
problem. The Roman government was never
made to work on this scale. And the
Roman government was always made to be a
city government.
But then you have, you know, this empire
form up. You have the money coming in,
and you have the administration, you
have the armies,
and none of that was actually
anything that was originally supposed to
be. And so, you have all of these
temporary solutions that just become
permanent because they kind of work. And
you have Therefore, you have all these
norms that just become established.
And what you really see with the chapter
of the Gracchus brothers is when you
have someone who just wants power and
realizes there's a very easy way to get
it by promising people the moon,
then those norms don't actually mean
anything. People can walk all over them,
ignore whatever they want. They can get
away with it because they're just doing
it. And when people get away with things
because they're just doing it and
because there's actually no
force of law that is bothering to stop
them, then the entire system starts to
fall apart. And this is where you really
see the unraveling of
I mean, we call it the Roman Republic,
but the Roman government system at this
point in time, where you start having
politicians who are much more focused
on, you know, opposing another
politician rather than benefiting the
state. You start having
people running for re-election term
after term after term. You start having
Gaius Gracchus actually brought up
something that was a very very very very
very spicy topic. He said, "Maybe we
should expand citizenship to the
Italians and let the Italians have some
citizenship."
No one had ever said this before, and
the Italians were very interested in the
prospect of actually having rights and
not necessarily having their people
chased off of their lands because the
Romans existed.
The grain laws that they'd produced
became an absolute fixture of Rome.
Anyone who tried to take away those
grain laws would never win anything ever
again.
And then, on top of all that,
like the precedent of the soldiers going
all the way back being deployed year
after year after year after year,
effectively made standing armies a
requirement for the Roman people. And
so, you've got to support the soldiers,
you've got to support the troops, but
supporting the troops ironically means
that they become poorer and poorer
because all of their They are not able
to actually maintain their stuff at
home. Because there is not actually a
system for a standing army even at this
point in time.
You still have these militia-based
annual levies.
And that just doesn't work when you're
administering an empire that needs the
garrisons that's constantly at war. And
so,
the final point, um
we have the rise of Gaius Marius. And
Julian, did you want to just go ahead
and give us a summary of who this guy is
and why we care?
Yeah, the final comment to make here is
we've tried to as much as possible tie
into sort of the deeper trends and
things that are happening, but now we're
at the point where
sort of the stage is set, and now it's
just kind of the people who are going to
push over the dominoes. So, this is
where it starts to get worth zooming a
little bit more. And, you know, maybe if
it wasn't Marius, it would have been
someone else, but because it's Marius,
we'll kind of dive into a little bit of
what he did. So, mostly for him, he
comes into power in this period of
populism, and Rome has to fight all
these wars. In this case, there's the
threat of invading foreigners. So, this
is where, okay, you can we can kind of
unite as a people, but he starts to
break precedent and say, "Well, there's
a lot of these landless poor. Can I
promise them wealth?" And so, he starts
to kind of rally the people. And um
yeah, he's just a man of the moment and
seems to work out for everyone. He
protects the Republic from invasion, but
it does set the precedent for, okay, I'm
a big powerful guy. I'm going to have
extended sort of consulships
back-to-back. I then have the dependency
of soldiers at my cause, and that starts
to set a precedent that's probably bad
for in the future, where as we saw in
the past, populism comes comes to blows
and sort of gets settled by small gangs
in the forums who take out knives. But
now, we're getting to the point, well,
what if the people who are fighting
don't just have gangs, but have entire
armies? So, that is the the precedent
that we're starting to set up with sort
of Marius. Yes, in one sense, it's good
that he defends the Republic, but a lot
of what he does sort of sets up the this
next um
ratcheting of of the tensions.
Yeah, and so, this is, again,
just like you said, it's
in some ways, you could say more
mainstream politicians in Rome really
capitalizing on this populism movement.
And Marius is just, as you said, he's
the best example. And if it if it hadn't
been him, it would have been someone
else. He is very well known for, you
know,
he ran won the the office of consul. And
then he did it again, and again, and
again, and again, and again, he actually
ended up becoming consul seven times
during his lifetime, which is
it never was matched until, you know,
you see the rise of the Roman emperors
themselves. Um
and so
he did this, you know, because there was
an emergency. I will There is a problem
with the Jugurthine War. It's being
badly run by a corrupt guy who's just
taking bribes from his enemy, so he
doesn't ever actually have to finish the
war. I will finish it. And so he went uh
to war against Jugurtha,
and he actually did end up finishing it.
He went ahead uh and then, you know,
after that, there was this massive
threat from the north with the Cimbri
and the Teutones who had raged through
northern Italy, they'd beaten some Roman
armies. The Romans saw them as an
existential threat. Frankly, between you
and me,
they probably just didn't really care.
Like they were a migrating people.
But Gaius Marius declared that they were
an an inexorable threat, and he was the
only solution. And so he was elected
consul again, he brought his armies up,
and he fought the Cimbri and the
Teutones, and he won. And so, you know,
we have this brave brave consul Marius
who was able to beat the evil big bads.
And he made money because, you know,
he's defeating all of these other
people, and he's taking all of their
stuff, and also there are probably a lot
of bribes being involved, but we don't
necessarily have to talk about that.
He was very successful on the
battlefield.
And one of the reasons he was so
successful is because
he promised his army land.
He was He straight up said to his army,
"Okay,
you serve in my army, I will give you
land in the south of Italy. I will give
you land in North Africa. I will make
sure that you have a farm to go home to
when you are finished fighting for me."
And his soldiers really really really
really really liked that. And so this is
where you And he tried actually. He
tried to get his soldiers land, and some
of them he succeeded, and some of them
the Senate was like, "Uh
no, we're not going to do that." So then
you start seeing these flash points
between the soldiers who are being
denied by the aristocracy, and the
generals who would promise their
soldiers the world. And
you know, the clash of populism
happening yet again.
Yes, so that is the tail end of this
whole setup for uh fall of the Roman
Republic. In our next one, we'll be
diving into how it kind of all unravels
and transitions to empire. Uh but again,
to recap, I think this is a a good base
to establish. Uh for me, it was really
useful to have Chris lay all this out.
Uh one of the major takeaways for me is
just the founding of the city, that this
is a government that was set up for just
small practical purposes, and over time,
it just has to be stretched and adapted.
And this timeline to me is really
indicative of just how that happens over
a long spanning of time as the, you
know, rules are codified or powers are
expanded, all this happens. But at the
same time, there's a lot of nuance in
here during this period where we think
the Republic is being strengthened to
benefit the people, well, there's
actually a lot of dictators in this
period. But it's within it's constrained
by norms. So all of this is okay, and
it's really only in this latter period
as you start to have the extreme growth
and extreme wealth gap where the cogs of
how everything can be patched starts to
fall apart, and it can't really solve
people's problems. And that's where,
well, if everything's gummed up, and the
norms are some of the things that are
gumming us up, then people start to
break those norms. But when norms can be
broken, humans are going to be humans,
and they are going to find ways to
consolidate power and do what's best for
them. And people co-opt the populist
fears and uh things that just the
everyday person wants for their own
benefit. And that really tees us up
towards well, now we're going to become
an empire where if you can't return
power to the people, and you've broken
all the norms, someone's just going to
come in and consolidate that power
permanently. So that really sort of ties
things up, and there's a lot of, you
know, details we went over for why this
happens to get us there. K-shaped
economy, troops deployed overseas, all
sorts of stuff like that. So anyways,
there's some parallels to modernity you
could take uh
home with you, but really uh I think
we've done a good job of showing how
this is very much distinct to the Roman
era and comes flavored in the Roman era.
Um and yeah, a lot of the details. So
thanks, Chris, for walking us through
this, and uh we'll see you all in the
next one. Absolutely. Cheers.